Hey guys.
Welcome back to the chorus in this section we're going to talk about legality.
How does legality apply to outsourcing specifically.
This is not contracting in general.
I'm talking specifically about how legality applies to when you take work and you get someone in another
country to do it for you.
So I'm sure a lot of you run into this problem before or you're wondering to yourself I'm going to select
someone who is overseas.
I've never met.
I don't even know the city they're from.
I have no instant no connection to them and I don't know if they're going to return my money back to
me or they're even going to do the project once I pay them.
Now if this were the case that we were working in the United States or in Europe or wherever you're
taking this course you probably know exactly how you would go about dealing with someone that takes
money and doesn't return what you agreed on.
Now the problem here is that we now have to deal with someone who is in a separate country.
Well for the practical matter of what happens if I pay someone and they don't actually give me the work
that I want.
Well really the only way that you address this is through prevention.
There is practically no way that you can get money back from someone who works in India who didn't deliver
on their promises or might have broken something in your contract it's actually it's practically impossible
unless you go to India or have someone who lives there who can help you through the process and even
then it could be a six month journey typically not worth it.
The way we work with this is we work on prevention.
So if you've contacted a firm directly through if you watch running in elections or the lectures where
we went through like The Firm West or we use google to find high quality freelancing firms if that's
the case and you work directly through them you probably did some contract work for the most part that
contract work is all just an exercise in making you feel better about the project.
That's really all it comes down to.
That contract might make you feel better but it's simply not going to help you actually get money back
or to remedy any of the broken terms in your contract.
It's really just an exercise in futility.
The way that I strongly suggest you work through this problem is two things.
One you use a platform like the ones we've covered to at least at the bare minimum handle the payments
associated with your project.
Now the way that they work is you pay them.
And then once the project's done you agree to it they release it.
Now if you pay them and your freelancer does not return what you expected is something something's wrong.
Something you'd be in a normally into a dispute with that company will then act as the arbiter between
the two of you and decide what where the money should go whether or not it's been finished what needs
to happen before the money should be released.
That is incredibly helpful.
And thankfully it's the case that a lot of freelancers a lot of freelance firms are used to this concept
it's an escrow but they're also used to having these companies oversee millions of projects.
Hold onto the money and then make the final determination about releasing it.
The downside to that obviously is that these companies are going to take a portion of the payment as
the employer.
It's not as big of a deal because the companies like Elance or freelancer or up work people per hour
they take the money out of the freelancers pocket.
So they essentially deducted from the freelancer.
Now your freelancer might bring that up and they might if you have a long term relationship ask to be
compensated on that.
But in my experience that 7 percent or 10 percent or whatever it ends up being sometimes it's lower
is almost always worth it.
It's always worth knowing that your money is at least protected in the case that something goes wrong.
Now if you've had a long term relationship with a company you've worked on them several projects then
it might be the case that you do not need this at all and you're perfectly fine saving those cost savings
between you and your contractor.
Now the other way to remedy this problem is by using a very rudimentary technique and it's called using
milestones milestones you've heard of this.
It's a little confusing if you never heard of it.
Essentially what you're doing is you take your project and you divide it up into segments.
Very similar to what we did when we wrote out our project description.
But this is for the actual process of building your project you take it up and you say here's one section.
Here's the second section.
Third fourth that whatever it is and then you say you know if our total project is say $2000 and we
have five segments in our project then we'll just divide it and every time you finish this segment you'll
get paid $400.
So what ends up happening is the freelancers will work on one portion and then once you see that it
works see that it's good see that it matches the requirements see that they delivered it on time.
There's no issues you release that milestone.
Then you go to the next section then you go to the next section and you do that until the project is
finished.
Now the downside to this obviously is that the freelancer they might get a little skittish about this
because they're afraid that you might say only give them a portion of the money or not be happy right
after the first section of work.
But unfortunately this is kind of the standard even if you use Elance or up work in any of those escrow
services they're going to make you put everything into milestones anyway.
So that's typically what they're used to.
Now there's hope.
It really runs the gamut in terms of like all the different types of milestones set up so you can get
a lot of people do 50 percent upfront 50 percent at the end.
That is better than paying 100 percent upfront.
But it's not nearly as good as say segmenting it out say you pay 20 percent upfront and then you pay
out the other 80 percent over the course of four different milestones.
In general it's going to yes it's a negative for the freelancer.
But it also creates a little bit.
It slows your project down ever so slightly because now all of a sudden you have four different milestones
that means you have four different checkpoints where they have to present their work to you or wait
for you to prove it and then you have to go through it and make sure that everything is to the T.
A lot of times you say this milestone is not done.
I need to go back and fix this and this and this.
Whereas if you did this in one big milestone you would have told them to fix everything at the very
end so you lose a little bit of efficiency.
But at the same time you really do save yourself from getting burned on putting up too much money up
front.
So that's the best way.
It all practicality of preventing yourself from getting burned legally in a freelancer relationship
use an escrow service.
They're very easy to use even if you made the arrangement outside of the escrow service.
Ask them to then go onto the service and bid on a private project.
You can use that then you can use say Lantz's service to maintain the work.
And Adam absolute minimum use a milestone system with them have that in writing so they know exactly
what they need to reach to get paid and just use that as kind of a way of preventing yourself from getting
burned once you then get used to that person you can pick really whatever you want to whatever arrangement
you think works.
Now legally what happens if something really does end up blowing up what happens if they take your idea
and they steal it.
Well unfortunately there's not much you can do because the legality around outsourcing is virtually
nonexistent.
Luckily if you use either Lance or you use up work or any of those Web sites they have their own terms
and agreements.
They have a long list the agreements that protect you in some ways.
So you can opt to have intellectual property protection and include that in the legal contract you make
with your freelancer.
However what happens if that person does actually steal your idea.
Well really nothing.
I mean there's virtually nothing they can do.
The only thing you can rely on is that you can rely on the fact that you used the techniques in this
course to pick a good freelancer a responsible trustworthy freelancer that most importantly has a track
record.
That's the biggest thing you can use to prevent a legality issue like say IP theft is that you look
for someone who has a reputation to protect.
If they have 50 projects on their L.A. profile and this is a big source of income for them they're not
going to want to jeopardize that over some small issue depending on how large a project is it's just
never worth it.
The shallow or their work history is the less inclined they're going to be to use to understand what
they have to lose in this type of situation.
But if they have a track record they're going to be a lot more committed to doing everything right.
It is a lot less to worry about.
But in general make sure that you're aware of this.
It is kind of the Wild Wild West because it is virtually impossible and a lot of these countries to
sue them or to have some legal action against the person you hired.
Why is that.
I mean it's solely because we have court systems in every single country.
They work within that country and they don't have any way of interacting between the two with Sprint
Qik have had disputes with Canadian companies and we're in San Francisco and even those two countries
that are very very similar and cooperate on so many different things.
We have no regle we have no legal remedy against them.
But in retrospect we could have saved ourselves by just using simple prevention techniques.
So be aware legality.
There's nothing you can really do.
You can't sue someone outside the country.
And if you can and a lot of situations you can it's very rarely worth it.
Only if you're doing a multimillion dollar project would it ever make sense to establish a presence
in another country and then pursue them legally.
The way that you protect yourself legally you use very practical common sense prevention methods use
milestones use escrow services make sure everything you're doing is written out in writing not because
it makes it legal but because you can now know exactly what is expected.
And what you should be receiving and there's no miscommunication between the two of you do you guys
have any questions at all or any stories about this post in the group discussion.
More than willing to go into depth with this kind of in general.
There are some exceptions there are a couple countries where I've heard of people be able to do small
claims court decisions against other companies but in general it's just not something you should plan
on relying on if you have legal concerns then honestly you should use prevention techniques to protect
yourself and if honestly passed that point you don't feel safe enough then it's probably the case that
you shouldn't be outsourcing.
OK guys I'll see in the next lecture.